[Music]
hey there most of you have probably seen
this movie before over and over again in
fact something has just gone wrong with
the airplane or spaceship and it's
spiraling out of control right before it
touches down stranding the main
characters on a desert island alien
planet or whatever hostile environment
they'll have to survive the pilot yells
Mayday Mayday
over the radio so I'm wondering about
this Mayday thing why does this
situation always happen on May 1st isn't
that a bit odd is there a conspiracy we
don't know about
well Mayday is actually one of the few
pieces of pilots shorthand most people
are familiar with but have you ever
wondered what it means what exactly our
pilots telling each other when they say
Mayday and other code words based on how
it's used in film you might think pilots
say Mayday in any emergency on the other
hand you could just as easily believe
it's only uttered when the plane is
about to crash neither of these are
strictly true although you're still on
the right track or I guess flight plan
anyway Mayday and other words like it
are known as procedure words or pro
words these phrases are used to convey
information quickly over the radio which
is essential when there's an emergency
at 30,000 feet
Mayday specifically falls under the
category of distress and rescue
passwords mayday is the spoken
equivalent of SOS and is the most urgent
kind of distress call it's only used
when a life-threatening emergency occurs
on a boat or aircraft if a plane loses
an engine or something catches fire the
crew and air controllers are going to
want to address that problem immediately
other situations where Mayday would be
used include things like medical
emergencies damage to the fuselage the
cabin becoming depressurized or a
malfunction in one of the aircraft's
critical electronics basically it covers
anything that would require an emergency
landing
or the deployment of emergency services
such as ambulance or fire crews when
such an emergency occurs the pilot or
captain will say Mayday not once not
twice but three times over the radio
followed by more information this
repetition is important in making sure
the call is heard clearly doing so also
helps to differentiate an actual mayday
call from a conversation about a mayday
call in some cases pilots might instead
say that they're declaring an emergency
this phrase has the same meaning as
mayday but is discouraged by groups such
as the International Civil Aviation
Organization the ICAO notes that people
often react with less urgency when the
word mayday goes unused for that reason
they encourage pilots to stick to the
officially recognized pro words the call
is followed by a message that contains
all the information responders might
need the specific format varies
depending on whether it's a boat or
aircraft calling for help but an
aircraft's mayday call and message will
sound something like this
Mayday Mayday Mayday example Air flight
111 we are out of tacos the passengers
are complaining very loudly now
obviously a taco shortage wouldn't
qualify as a real emergency but that
gives you an idea of the basic format
hey can you even get tacos on an
airplane that would certainly make up
for the layover in Albuquerque what were
the best and worst flights you've ever
been on let me know down in the comments
hopefully any emergencies were on the
taco level incidentally if you happen to
have a pilot's license and think a taco
call sounds like a funny prank maybe
keep it off the airwaves emergency calls
are serious business and regulatory
agencies like the FAA don't take kindly
to their misuse ignore that warning and
you might find yourself on the wrong end
of a two hundred and fifty thousand
dollar fine then you'll really be in
distress so what about problems that are
almost emergencies but not quite one
step down from mayday is pan pan or xxxx
acts in Morse code this signals that the
craft needs assistance but no
is an immediate physical danger on a
plane this is the difference between a
fire and a fuel leak both are bad and
need to be dealt with immediately but
one poses a much more immediate danger
to the passengers and crew usually this
means the aircraft is still able to fly
but that it might be unsafe to continue
doing so a good example is what happened
to cyprus airways flight 303 on October
12 2018 the Airbus 319 was passing over
Greece when the pilots noticed a crack
in the windshield this seems like a
small problem until you remember the
difference in air pressure between the
inside and outside of an aircraft in
flight not wanting to risk a small
problem growing much bigger the pilots
descended to 23,000 feet before making
an emergency landing in Athens the
situation wasn't exactly an emergency
but could have become one if the crew
and air traffic controllers hadn't
responded appropriately
pan-pan is also used when someone aboard
has a medical problem that the captain
doesn't consider an emergency in this
case they'll be patched through to a
medical professional that will advise
the flight crew on how to proceed if the
doctor decides it's an emergency after
all the call will be upgraded to a
mayday and the plane will make an
emergency landing at the nearest airport
British pilots once used the call
pan-pan medico to denote this kind of
emergency but that term has fallen out
of official use as with a mayday call a
call of pan-pan will involve saying the
word three times before detailing the
specific problem and before you ask no
unless the passenger started a literal
riot over it running out of tacos does
not warrant a pan-pan other distress
procedure words include but are not
limited to security for reporting
navigation hazards and sealants Mayday
or sea launch distress for requesting a
frequency be restricted to emergency
communications now at this point you
might be wondering where these words
came from you might also have noticed
some of these sound vaguely French
pardon my french pronunciations if you
have then you're halfway to the answer
the term Mayday was introduced in 1921
by a British air traffic controller
named Frederick Stanley Montford he had
often heard French pilots used the word
Mater when in distress that means help
me in French but resembles the word may
and de Montford proposed Mayday since it
was easy for an English speaker to
pronounce while being seen as unlikely
to come up in regular conversation it
also sounds a lot cooler than just
saying help me over the radio sorry
France or England I'm honestly not sure
who gets credit for this so feel free to
debate that in the comment section while
you're down there don't forget to hit
like and share this video with your
friends anyway pan-pan comes from the
French word honey meaning breakdown
security means security or safety in
French well Salons was inspired by the
French word for silence that covers
basically everything you need to know
about Mayday and the other emergency
words but there are plenty more in
everyday use standard terms include the
words like Roger Wilco over and out most
non pilots know these words annoying
actual pilots by habitually misusing
them over means that you're finished
speaking and waiting for a response
while out means that no reply is
necessary if you said over and out
to a real pilot or air traffic
controller you would in order confuse
them annoy them and make them think you
don't know what you're doing another
frequent pairing is Roger and Wilco at
least these aren't completely
contradictory Roger means that the
previous message was understood it can
be used to indicate yes in some
circumstances such as receiving orders
but doesn't automatically mean that if
you want it made clear that you're doing
as instructed you would say Wilco which
means we'll comply you wouldn't say
Roger Wilco for the same reason saying
ATM machine is technically incorrect by
the way so is added bonus very unique
intended mistake and one of my favorites
foreign import they're all redundant and
repetitive but I digress
other common Pro words include phrases
like this is say again and correction
which are at least self-explanatory
these words and phrases are instrumental
when you need to convey information
quickly over the radio so how about you
are you now ready to ace that pilot's
test right well maybe just the written
part or how about just buy a ticket and
hey if you learn something new today
then give this video a like and share it
with a friend
but don't go miss communicate with
pilots in the ATC just yet we have over
2,000 cool videos for you to check out
just click on this left or right video
and enjoy Roger Wilco and stay on the
bright side of life